An upset Yolanda Cronjé of the Louis Trichardt SPCA this week shared a tragic tale of a puppy who had been run over in Kort Street and then left broken and bleeding in the road while the driver drove away from the scene, even though fully aware of what he had done. “A horrible thing happened on Thursday, 15 November,” Yolanda told the Zoutpansberger. “At 06:42 I received a call from a friend saying that a bakkie had just driven over a dog and then sped away. After a painful experience for this puppy, Dr Freddie Harris of Blouberg gave him pain medication, and after an x-ray told me that besides the wounds, he had a pelvis fracture as well, which would have to be set with screws. This was a tough call to make as the SPCA would be responsible for payment for the operation at this point. We felt that we had to fight for this boy and we managed to get the funds to pay the vet bill after I got the approval of the whole committee.” The SPCA can ill afford extra expenses and would greatly welcome any contributions from the public towards his account. Contributions can be paid into account name SPCA Louis Trichardt, Standard Bank Louis Trichardt, account number 282 374 639, branch code 05 25 49 using the reference ‘Jack Russell’. The SPCA are aware of who ran this puppy over and left the scene, and appeal for them to do the right thing and at least contribute also. It is not uncommon for people to drive over or otherwise hit animals with their vehicles, and according to Yolanda, it is unfortunately also not uncommon for these people to keep on driving without stopping to see if the creature that they hit is dead or alive and help or get help for it if it is alive (take it to a vet) and injured. “Even if the animal died on impact, then at least dignify what happened and move it to the side of the road,” she said. Yolanda urges anyone who witnesses such hit and run incidents to get as much information and evidence as possible, and phone the SPCA inspector to lodge a formal complaint. For more information, phone inspector Lawrence Khodobo at tel. 082 965 5151. 