Louis Trichardt residents arrived in style on 2 November at the fourth annual SPCA auction, with wallets and hearts wide open. Northgate Lodge’s hall was packed on the night when bidders showed their support for the animals and the SPCA team that looks out for them. As well as the impressive items offered on auction, trays of delicious snacks were offered to guests seated at tables decorated with large freshly cut proteas and dark-chocolate cupcakes. The hugely talented and good-hearted Jak de Priester put on a show, with songs and humour that had the crowd whooping out loud and waving cellphone lights in the air. Alicia Thomas of the Louis Trichardt SPCA said: “When we first contacted Jak, it was already quite short notice, but we had heard about his charity shows for SPCAs in Gauteng, called “Gee jou hart vir liefde”, so we thought we had nothing to lose and gave him a call. Miraculously, he was still available, and he agreed to do the concert for us, even though he had to fly to Cape Town first thing the next morning. We are so grateful to this special human and his incredibly kind heart. He is not just exceptionally talented and has an amazing stage presence, he is humble too, which is inspiring and refreshing. Thank you to Jak de Priester and his whole team; it was such a pleasure working with you all.” Auctioned items reached top prices, with enthusiastic bidding for a variety of things, including an electric guitar signed by Karen Zoid for R15 500, both sponsored and bought by Letitia Weyers in a great show of support for this cause. Phillip Potgieter won the bid for the sought-after 200 grafted Beaumont Macadamia trees for R14 000. A few mystery boxes were also auctioned off, and they proved to be not only worth the laughter their names elicited, but also their thoughtfully-put-together contents. People particularly appreciated the Mother-in-Law Hamper and the Hangover Hamper. Finally, DJ Jonty supplied the music for those who wanted to dance the night away to do just that. The organisers and participants agreed that the evening had been a great success for all, but especially for the animals. To view a video of the stylish event by Leslie Gaigher, visit https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JYLZIY-bcUo. 