“We will continue to work together with our traditional leader, Musanda Vho-Nyamananga Budeli to bring about more development in our village. Traditional leaders are responsible for ruling and we are responsible for bringing development.” These were the words of Mr Zwiiteni Justice Maphaha, after he was elected the chairperson of the Milaboni SANCO branch two weeks ago. The elections were held at Milaboni Musanda. Maphaha is serving a second term as a chairperson after diligently serving his community during his first term, which expired last week. He said SANCO supplemented the work of traditional leaders. “We are disturbed by reports in other areas where SANCO is always at loggerheads with traditional leaders.  Ours is a good case study that SANCO can work well with traditional leaders. Our traditional leader is always hands-on and gives us opportunity to hold our meetings at his kraal. We are very grateful to have him, and we will continue to work with him and his council to bring a better life to our people.” Maphaha said through the good working relationship with their local traditional leader, Thulamela Municipality, government departments and various community structures, the community of Milaboni had witnessed various developments in the past years. “Among other things, the village has a tar road, electricity and modern schools. Although there is a huge task ahead, we are prepared to work unceasingly to make this village one of the best in Vhembe.” He says although much had been achieved, some challenges remained that needed to be addressed in the village. “We are engaging with the relevant authorities to make sure that water supply challenges are resolved once and for all. We also have new dwelling extensions that need to be electrified. The issues of crime and unemployment also need to be tackled without compromise. These are some of the issues we will prioritise during our term of office.” Also elected during the meeting were Patrick Kutame (deputy chairperson), Nyelisani Maphaha (general secretary), Ryna Ragwala (deputy secretary), Ivy Sigame (treasurer) and Vhuyani Budeli (organizing secretary). 