Limpopo Premier Stanley Mathabatha has promised not to reshuffle his cabinet. This follows rumours that he was going to make several changes in the top five ANC officials and provincial executive committee after the ruling party’s elective conference held in Polokwane last weekend. Cooperative Governance, Human Settlement and Traditional Affairs MEC Jerry Ndou is one of the previous leaders who lost his position, that of deputy chairman, when he was beaten by Vhembe’s executive mayor, Cllr Florence Radzilani, while Makoma Makgoropetje lost her position of deputy secretary to Rodgers Bioskop Makamu. Makgoropetje is the current MEC for Transport and Community Safety. Knocks Seabi is the only official who was not in a government position, as his title of provincial secretary is a permanent position in the party. Seabi’s position was taken by Soviet Lekganyane. The position of treasurer, which used to be occupied by the late Thembi Nwendamutswu, is now occupied by Danny Msiza. Since the provincial elective conference results came out, rumours have been going around that Mathabatha was going to reshuffle his cabinet by removing these who had not made it to the PEC list, to accommodate newly elected leaders, including Radzilani. Although Mathabatha stressed that “there is no need to make changes in my cabinet” as national elections are around the corner, many still believe that Radzilani will vacate her position as executive mayor of Vhembe and replace the late Joyce Mashamba, who was MEC for Agriculture. Seaparo Sekoati, who is the MEC for Economic Development, Environment and Tourism, has been acting in Mashamba’s position for more than three months because of the veteran MEC’s poor health. Mashamba (67) passed away last Wednesday, due to a kidney-related problem. Meanwhile, former Musina Mayor Caroline Mahasela is one of those from Vhembe who made it to the PEC list, together with Jerry Ndou, Falaza Mdaka, Nandi Ndalane, Khosikhulu Vho-Kennedy Midiyavhathu Tshivhase and Mavhungu Luruli. Dr Pophi Ramathuba, whom many mistakenly believe is a resident of Vhembe, is from Waterberg District and she received the second highest number of votes (605) in the list of the 30 PEC members.