Showing your support for rhino conservation and getting actively involved have never been easier. Rhino Connect, a registered NPO, has invited members of the public to become actively involved with the protection of South Africa’s diminishing rhino population. The organisation has been in operation for the past two years, mainly in the Vivo area, with great success. “Rhino Connect focusses on the protection and conservation of rhinos within the private sector in South Africa. The organisation has forged close relationships over the years with private-owned wildlife conservations, protecting a wide range of animals, the majority of them listed as endangered or vulnerable,” said Rhino Connect founder and director Tersia Jooste. At present, South Africa is custodian of approximately 19 000 white rhinos, with approximately 20% of this number in private ownership. “There is a huge decline in rhino figures since 2008, with state-owned and national parks losing the most rhino per annum, mostly due to poaching, compared to privately owned rhino,” said Tersia. For this reason, said Tersia, their focus is on the private rhino owner. “The private sector invests enormous amounts in the protection and breeding of rhino, which amounts to almost 7 000 rhinos on private reserves, which at the end will prove to save the species for generations to come. The cost of protecting small populations of rhinos is colossal and, in some cases, can discourage landowners from having rhinos on their land,” said Tersia. This is where Rhino Connect aims to make a difference by providing support to private rhino owners through volunteer programmes, whereby the public can play an active role in the protection of rhino, especially during the full-moon periods when poachers are most active. To this end, Rhino Connect frequently hosts training courses that are open to the general public. These training courses, among others, include a course in tracking spoor, tactical shooting and an observation course. The next such training day will take place on 24 August. “One of our main and most successful focus areas is involving members of the public in rhino conservation efforts,” said Tersia. She added that their training days, normally scheduled from a Friday to a Sunday, are extremely popular, with whole families sometimes attending. The cost of the course includes all meals, accommodation and course material. “Our aim is not to make money from the training day. We merely cover costs. All are welcome, irrespective of their age. We are also more than willing to adjust course fees, depending on the group of people attending,” said Tersia. To find out more about the next course, Tersia invited members of the public to contact her or any of the Rhino Connect staff members listed below. “For more information about where the course will be presented and fees, please phone or write to us. As we normally try and host the course on a rhino farm, we do not want to advertise such details,” said Tersia. For more information, contact Tersia at 083 759 1608 (tersia@rhinoconnect.co.za), Sya at 082 332 9512 (sya@rhinoconnect.co.za), Jana at 083 272 7334 (jana@rhinoconnect.co.za) or Mariska at 083 294 2994. Alternatively, visit www.rhinoconnect.co.za or their Facebook page, Rhino Connect. 