The incidence of violent crimes escalated the past two weeks in the Soutpansberg district, with murderers and thieves making their presence widely known. Following in the wake of five farm attacks last week, all taking place and being reported within a 48-hour period, this has been a tense time for local farmers and town residents alike in South Africa. On 9 August, a man was shot and killed on a farm near Bandelierkop. The incident happened near the sleeping quarters on the farm Driekloof, owned by Mr Gert Reynecke. An employee was shot by unknown assailants in what appeared to be a deliberate act and a case of mistaken identity rather than an attempted farm burglary. The victim later died of his wounds. Makhado Police spokesperson Constable Irene Radzilane said that a murder investigation was underway and that no arrests had thus far been made in this case. On 11 August, in the early hours of the morning, the Adam’s Apple Hotel and Conference Centre was the scene of a violent armed robbery. Radzilane stated that two robbers gained access to the manager’s quarters, both armed with pistols that they aimed at him while demanding cash and keys. A further two thugs then also entered, one armed with a panga and the other with a crowbar, while another two waited outside. The six criminals made off with 12 plasma television sets, a valuable wristwatch and an undisclosed amount of money and valuables. Two of the TVs were later recovered by the police. No serious injuries were reported, and the police are investigating the matter. If anyone has any information related to this case, they are requested to contact Detective W/O Mailula at the Bandelierkop Police Station on 066 480 0414 urgently. Also on 11 August, the owner of a popular pet shop in Krogh street was viciously attacked. Const Radzilane stated that the shop owner was allegedly surprised at about 17:45 when two suspects approached him, one armed with a pistol and another one with a knife, demanding money. They allegedly bound him with tape, assaulted him with the butt of the pistol and managed to escape with an undisclosed amount of cash, valuables, and jewellery. They drove away in his VW Polo Classic, Registration Number DDR289L. Anyone with information who can assist in locating these suspects can contact Detective Sgt Tshilidzi Nthembuluseni on 082 215 3171 or 015 519 4300. On a more positive note, in a media statement dated 13 August, the SAPS in Limpopo said that, in simultaneous joint operations, 546 persons aged between 19 and 56 had been arrested on suspicion of various crimes. These include housebreaking and theft, theft of a motor vehicle, carjacking, illegal immigration, house and business robbery, possession of firearms and ammunition without a licence, and possession of suspected stolen property. Included in the items recovered during these operations were 23 motor vehicles (some confiscated while transporting dagga and others suspected of having been stolen), seven firearms with ammunition and two magazines, seven cell phones, cash, marijuana, electric cable, and various other items. 