The latest results from data-driven studies by highly respected scientists indicate very definite connections between the projected poverty or wealth and birth rates in any given population during and following periods of either plenty or penury. Recent figures in the Limpopo Socio-Economic Review and Outlook report, issued by the Limpopo Provincial Government, appear to prove this closer to home in a more personal way. People could find the size of the population, statistics, facts and projections boring and of no use whatsoever, but according to the late Hans Rosling, who is known around the world as the guru of statistics, this knowledge can not only be useful, but aid in future decisions on both personal and global scales. The theory behind how this operates comes from several studies, but Rosling explains in layman’s terms. He states in interviews shortly before his death in February last year that poverty, or the threat of possible poverty-related death, appears to predict an immediate rise in birth rates, and usually a rise in the birth of male children in particular. Middle-class status or affluence indicates both a fall in fertility and the birth of fewer male offspring than female. Parts of these studies show that sometimes, for reasons as yet unknown, birth rates will change shortly prior to the occurrence of completely unforeseeable events that could lead to poverty or increased poverty-related death. What statisticians are stating in studies of world demographics, and lately more particularly South African demographics, is that while people are unaware, on an individual basis, of when more or fewer children will be “required” to ensure the survival of any given population group, the population groups themselves are in some way extremely aware. The unexpected way that this demographic works is that while people believe that smaller families will lead to more wealth, Rosling states that more wealth leads to smaller families. He says that as long as the status quo suggests that poverty lies ahead for a certain population, that population will respond by producing enough children to ensure its survival, regardless of the anticipated losses to said poverty. The other side of that coin is that once a population begins to see a little affluence, the possibility of death because of poverty shrinks and, in conjunction with this, so does the birth rate. Rosling states that you need to begin to get healthy and wealthy before you get to see a dip in population rather than the other way around. In one particular TED talk presentation he states that what the world needs is not birth control but rather wealth creation, which leads to healthier people and a natural drop in birth rates. A very recent study by the head of the Solidariteit Research Institute, Connie Mulder, found that Afrikaans-speaking people will number more than 7 million in 2031, 270 000 more than in the 2011 census. Findings are that birth rate numbers of Afrikaans speakers of all races are going to increase sharply. As well as that discovery, the study found that not only are the emigration rates in this group smaller than thought but also that a trend exists for already-emigrated Afrikaners to return to South Africa. It therefore appears that the Afrikaans-speaking population “sees its very existence threatened” and is thus “taking counter-measures” by making sure that enough people are born to try and ensure the continuation of this demographic group. Births, deaths and migratory habits within a population are directly affected by its wealth, health and life expectancy. As conditions improved in certain areas for the white population of South Africa through to the 20th century, family units went from having six or more children to having only two. Record keeping in the Zoutpansberg has been erratic for the past few centuries since the area was settled by whites. With the forming of the Union of South Africa, better records were kept for the Transvaal Province, of which what is now Limpopo Province formed a significant part in every respect. Even taking into account the occasional sloppy reporting with regard to race during certain periods, putting together a list of workable figures and statistics is still possible. Statistics SA, in their Poverty Trends South Africa report, states that while a decline in poverty occurred between 2006 and 2011, levels rose by 2015, with the poverty percentage rising to 55.5% from 53.2%. While that percentage does not appear too large, the actual difference is well over a million “new” people now living in poverty. Current statistics from the Limpopo Local Government show that poverty in the district is going up, and that is going to mean an increase in the population. This, combined with the apparent current lack of opportunities in this province for individual wealth creation, is likely to lead to even more people living in poverty. Rosling commented in 2015: “The biggest change of our time? Africa’s increase from 1 to 4 billion people!” Records from the whole of South Africa show that to predict the future is possible in surprising ways. A United Nations revision report in 2015 supplied statistics that showed that the whole world population had hit 7.349 billion people by the middle of 2015, which points to a world growth of around a billion in a 12-year period. Breaking things down a little more, Asia makes up 60% (with 4.393 billion) and Africa 16% (with 1.186 billion) of the world population in 2015. The report further states that: “Africa has the highest rate of population growth among major areas, growing at a pace of 2.55% annually in 2010-2015. Consequently, of the additional 2.4bn people projected to be added to the global population between 2015 and 2050, 1.3bn will be added in Africa. After 2050, Africa is expected to be the only major area still experiencing substantial population growth. As a result, Africa’s share of the global population is projected to grow to 25% in 2050 and 39% by 2100, while the share residing in Asia will fall to 54% in 2050 and 44% in 2100. Various university studies share findings highlighting the powerful effects of variables relating to women’s agency (e.g. female literacy and female labour force participation) on mortality and fertility. These things are associated with significantly lower levels of female disadvantage in child survival. In contrast, variables relating to the general level of development and modernisation have relatively weak effects on demographic outcomes. Rosling shares his theories, which are all based on real statistics, that regardless of such huge spikes in population growth in certain areas of the globe, the world as a whole has progressed towards better health and more wealth, rather than away from these things. He said: “It seems you can move much faster if you’re healthy first than if you’re wealthy first.” He goes on to show that people only seem to stop having children when there is reasonable certainty that the ones that they have already will survive. This is the reason, according to Rosling, that the world population is almost guaranteed to hit 11 billion and remain there for a time. He states that families get bigger when a likelihood of death in poverty exists. This explains why, according to him, such a massive population explosion is occurring in Africa, while the population of Asia is stabilising in line with the economic upswing there and a better health outlook. Rosling says: “Why do I as a professor from public health speaking about health and demography get invited to Goldman Sachs [and] all these big banks around the world? Because I tell them I can see on my screen when economic growth comes, before you can see it. In the past, economic growth was driving demographics, and now it's the other way around. First, I see decent life coming and I see children born-per-woman drop. I see the two-child family, and I see the economic growth starting in Vietnam, in Thailand … not only in China. And this change is coming, so if you want to know where to invest in Africa, go and look at demographics. Governments can't run bedrooms. Bedrooms run the world. If you have countries where the fertility rate is coming down, just segmentise the population. Look at the most educated 20% in Ghana, in Tanzania, in Ethiopia: you will find two to three children per woman. You will find an emerging China in Africa. Go there to invest if you want to earn money, if you want to have nice pensions when you retire, place part of your capital there because there you will see fast growth.” 