Within hours of a daring armed robbery at the Pick n Pay store at Makhado Crossing in Louis Trichardt, the same store fell victim to a second robbery. The first robbery took place early Wednesday morning, 1 August. According to local police spokesperson Const Irene Radzilane, an unidentified man walked into the store just after opening at 09:00 pretending to be a client. He suddenly produced a firearm, grabbed a money bag from one of the female employees and fired a shot into the air. The man then ran towards the back of the store to exit through the receiving gate. He, however, got into a struggle with a security guard stationed at the gate. “He fired another two shots and managed to escape,” said Radzilane, adding that he got away in a silver Ford Focus that was parked at the back of the store. No-one was injured during the robbery. Radzilane said that the man got away with an undisclosed amount of money. Hours later, during the evening of 2 August, the store was robbed yet again. It is alleged that workers at Pick n Pay reported for duty and found that a large amount of money in the cash office was stolen by unknown suspects. The police were notified, responded immediately and started with the initial investigations and subsequently, a manhunt for the suspects ensued. “The method used to gain entry in this shop is not yet clear at this stage, but the ongoing police investigations will tell. The suspects in this matter are still unknown and there is no arrest,” said provincial police spokesperson Colonel Moatshe Ngoebe. Ngoebe, however, added that they are requesting Mr Khutso Michael Maponya (28) from Lenyenye Township outside Tzaneen to come to the Makhado SAPS or to go to his nearest police station to assist with investigations in this matter. “Anyone else with information which can lead to the arrest of the suspects involved in this matter, may contact Colonel Nyelisani Mabatha at 082 565 8171 or the crime stop number 086 001 0111 or the crime line SMS 32211 or the nearest police station,” said Ngoebe.