Young Louis Trichardt resident William Scott has scooped a much-sought-after position as one of the 10 male finalists in the Limpopo Face of Fashion 2018 Modelling Competition to be held in Polokwane this year. William was only recently discovered by the newly opened Ace Modelling franchise in Louis Trichardt, together with his sister Chantal, who has also signed with the company. He has already won a coveted spot in the Face of Fashion 2018 Limpopo modelling competition, an event that will launch a few South African models to lofty heights of success in that lucrative industry. William is one of 10 finalists in the ultra-prestigious competition, which will be taking place on 1 September at the Mall of the North in Polokwane. The male and female winners of this competition will each win R15 000 cash and a contract with the international Ice Modelling company. Both William (22) and Chantal (19) are quietly confident yet respectful young adults and very down to earth. They both enjoy simple pleasures such as family time, fishing with their father and hanging out with their friends in town, but they are very excited about what their futures now hold. “I never thought that I’d even be considered as a model - modelling wasn’t anywhere in my thoughts and plans, so on that day that Sharon Stander approached my sister and me here in Louis Trichardt, I was blown away. Then, being scouted by ICE models and called on stage at the conference in Sandton in June really took me by surprise. Now I’m a finalist in the Limpopo Face of Fashion competition. Thanks to Sharon and Jacqueline from Ace for believing in me, helping me to work hard, and opening doors to a future career in modelling. I’ve made so many great memories with the people that I’ve met along the way, and the friends that I’ve made on this journey have become like family to me. Ace are breaking down borders and changing people’s perspective on modelling, and I’m so glad to be a part of it in Louis Trichardt,” said William. Chantal works for a local law firm and William will be moving to a managerial position from September this year. Their eyes light up when they talk about the conference they attended earlier this year in Sandton. “It was such a boost for my self-confidence,” said Chantal. “We made so many contacts and new friends there. I just feel so much better about myself,” she added. The two even met Radio Jacaranda Breakfast with Martin Bester Show co-host and beauty queen Liesl Laurie and interacted with top designers and other celebrities of the fashion world there. They helped William conquer his fear of performing by getting him up on stage to sing to an audience of 400. With the backing of some of his classmates, all singing a cappella, he let rip with We will rock you, and said afterwards that he just wanted to do more of that too. William said that a whole new world had opened up for him and his sibling, and he urged other young adults in Louis Trichardt not to believe that just because the town was small one could not do something big with one’s life. The two young models both plan on diving into the industry in all of its incarnations - music videos, television and magazine advertising, poster and fashion modelling, pageants and ramp modelling. William has a huge opportunity ahead of him by being selected as one of the 10 male finalists in the Face of Fashion 2018 competition, and he is clearly going to be a great success as a model. This is a huge event, labelled as the modelling competition of the year and with well over R130 000 in prizes and world-class contracts to be won. The evening itself is going to be quite an event, with comedian and entertainer Schalk Bezuidenhout as master of ceremonies, celebrity judges Joani Johnson, Steffi Rinaldi, Casper Bosman and Corné van Niekerk in attendance, and live music by the band Go the Rodeo. Limited tickets are available to the public from iTickets, so if you would like to mingle with gorgeous models, top fashion designers and local celebrities, be sure to get yours. 