Since the Masingita Group of Companies started with construction on expanding the Makhado Crossing centre into a regional shopping mall, water tankers have frequently been spotted drawing water from the landmark dam next to the Bergwater Hotel in Louis Trichardt’s Rissik Street. This has left numerous residents fuming, as nobody could understand why the practice is allowed despite the obvious fact that, under normal circumstances, doing so would be considered illegal. Residents watched in disbelief as the water level in the dam dropped constantly on an almost daily basis to being almost depleted. Fortunately, the good rains of the past two weeks replenished the water level again. The question asked was: Is the municipality aware of this practice and did they give the contractors permission to do so? The inability of the Vhembe District Municipality (VDM) to supply water to the town’s taps seems to be the main reason why contractors were allowed to withdraw water from the dam for construction purposes. Residents will be well aware of the frustration of being left waterless. Last week, the Zoutpansberger confirmed that the town’s reservoirs had run completely dry. A source within the VDM stated at that stage that the reservoirs were empty because of a “sit-down” by employees of the Makhado Municipality’s electrical department. Employees within this department are currently on a go-slow while demanding their outstanding overtime payouts. The Makhado Municipality admitted this week that they had indeed given the contractors the go-ahead to withdraw water from the dam. In fact, they recommended it as they were left with no other alternative. “The contractor wanted to use potable water, which is very scarce in town. We couldn’t allow them to use clean water when people do not have water,” was the written response by municipal spokesperson Mr Louis Bobodi. Asked about the legality of their decision, Bobodi reiterated that this was allowed solely because of a shortage of clean potable water in town. Nature seems to have to pay the price for man’s inability to secure a constant water supply to town.