Representatives of various stakeholders within the Musina Municipality converged during two sessions to give their input on the municipality’s integrated development plan (IDP) last Wednesday. The first session of the IDP Representative Forum took place at Madimbo Community Hall in the morning and another one continued at the Nancefield municipal offices in the evening. This is part of Musina Municipality’s public-participation activities prior to the start of the new financial year on 01 July 2018. The event also served to enhance democracy and public participation in the government’s decision-making processes, where ordinary community members and stakeholders are given an opportunity to interact with their elected political representatives and administrators. During the two meetings, the municipality gave a report on its performance and plans for the new financial year. Mayor Mihloti Muhlope said the municipality used public-participation activities as a two-way platform for sharing information that demonstrated responsiveness to the needs of the people. “This is a basis for sustained dialogue between the government and the people and a mechanism for fact-finding by the government to align services with the needs of the people. This assists us in realizing an efficient, effective development-oriented public service and empowered, fair and inclusive citizenship through a well-functioning communication system that also proactively informs and engages the public about what the government is doing to improve their lives.” She said the municipality was using the public-participation activities as a unique platform, given its ability to foster active participatory and meaningful dialogue between the council and stakeholders. “Government has introduced a variety of platforms to consolidate, monitor and respond swiftly to public concerns – and this is just one of them. The people have elected us and gave us the mandate to work for them, and this is the opportunity to report back to them how far we have gone in addressing their needs.” One of the community members who attended the IDP Representative Forum, Mr Ntsieni Ramakokovhu from Muswodi village, commended Musina Municipality for affording stakeholders and community members the opportunity to be part of the decision-making process. “We can see that the municipality is addressing communication challenges by enabling us to understand, negotiate and take part in issues that affect us on a daily basis.”