Louis Trichardt-based Baobab processor EcoProducts is launching a new skin-care range in April 2018. “It’s hard to believe that it’s been almost two years in the making from the first glimmering ideas to the fruition of being in full production today,” said Dr Sarah Venter, the owner of EcoProducts. Inspired by the abundant riches that come from the baobab, EcoProducts has created BaoCare, a100% pure and natural skin-healing range that uses the rare baobab oil as its foundational hero ingredient. Baobab oil is a rich, amber-gold oil that is cold-pressed from the small brown seeds found within the fruit pod of the baobab tree. EcoProducts’ certified organic, wild-harvested baobab oil is something special, with remarkable skin-healing properties just on its own. It’s no secret that it’s highly sought after as an ingredient for many cosmetics houses. So, when Venter conceptualised the range, she always knew that baobab oil was going to be the hero ingredient. “We’ve advanced baobab oil to a whole new level,” said Venter. “In the BaoCare range, we’ve boosted baobab’s natural properties by adding expertly formulated essential oils and other natural plant extracts to offer solutions for very dry skin, scarring and stretch marks, eczema and psoriasis, problem skin and acne, skin nourishment, deep moisturisation and luminous, glowing, radiant skin,” added Venter. The five new products are tissue oil, acne skin care, radiance (anti-aging), eczema skin care and 100% pure baobab oil. These are already available from Du Toit’s Pharmacy, Da Silva Pharmacy, Makhado Crossing Link Pharmacy and Tsonga Textiles. “BaoCare is one of the few South African ranges that is free from synthetic chemical ingredients, parabens and mineral oils. It’s a skin-care solution that has been meticulously formulated with ingredients best known to be helpful in restoring and nurturing the natural radiance and beauty of the skin,” said Venter. Venter believes it is impossible to separate what we create from how and where we create it. That’s why BaoCare is as much about the natural skin care solutions they have created as the people who help to produce their range and the environment from which they source their raw materials. The certified organic baobab oil is wild-harvested in the Limpopo by mostly women from Venda communities employed by EcoProducts. The company also runs the Baobab Foundation, which sources funding to support pre-school crèches, and the Baobab Guardians Programme, a baobab tree-planting initiative.