After being targeted for burglary five times, with the fifth incident being both violent and traumatising, the De Agrella family have had enough. They want to sell their hotel and conference centre outside of Louis Trichardt, but that might not be an easy thing to do. Vincent De Agrella was frustrated enough to participate in one of the public hearings on the land rights amendment bill held in Thohoyandou, Limpopo. The De Agrella family bought the Adam’s Apple Hotel in 1998. The property was subject to a land claim in 2005, but this only came to the family’s notice in 2015. After negotiating with the claimants, an agreement was reached whereby De Agrella would be permitted to lease the ground that the hotel is situated on as the claimants were interested in the land only and not the buildings. Part of the deal was that training would be given to local youths in the hotel industry, for which they would also receive certification and thus have a much better chance of being employed. De Agrella says that he sent many letters and communications to the government to find out how to implement the “willing buyer, willing seller” procedure, which he was ready to proceed with. Even though he was willing to accept a very reasonable price, he says, he was completely ignored, making a farce of the systems already in place to make the redistribution of land less painful than it is. He says that part of his philosophy has always been, and still is, to help uplift the people of Limpopo and that bad governance and corruption are partly to blame for the high incidence of crime in this province. People are hungry, he says. When some people are hungry, they steal and get violent. The Department of Tourism is begging for us to grow the industry, says De Agrella, but the Land Claims Commission is stopping them from working on that growth that would benefit so many people currently unemployed. “The burglary that took place here on 9 August was incredibly traumatic for all concerned, but especially so for my parents, and living this way is no longer acceptable.” In the early hours of that day, De Agrella was held hostage for three hours while the invaders ransacked the place. They beat him with a wheel spanner, and although they shot at a hotel guest and attacked his security guard, fortunately nobody was fatally injured. The robbers instructed their victims to remain in one of the rondavels and, addressing De Agrella by his first name, threatened to come back and kill him if he tried to call for help. The victims lay there for an hour to be sure that these violent criminals had left before moving. De Agrella says that crime is out of control in this province and that on the same day of the burglary at Adam’s Apple, another three took place in Vleifontein and three in Louis Trichardt. He cites another example where, on one occasion, local protection groups had found the spoor of 16 different groups of poachers, all active on one night. He says that he has seen this coming for a long time, and that a large part of his motivation for attending the land-claims hearings was to get his belief across that the systems already in place are good enough to get the issue of land redistribution addressed without resorting to expropriation without compensation, and that the government is already in possession of land waiting to be distributed. He concludes that the political will to address this issue has been lacking for too long, and that the truth is that if the government did use the systems already in place, they could begin to implement land reform without so much unnecessary confusion and trauma. 