Earlier this month, readers heard of Michael Deysel’s (29) struggle with paralysis, pain and, from the latest diagnosis in August, a new cancerous tumour on his spine. His gratitude to be alive and his unfailingly positive outlook in the face of painful and frightening life challenges since the age of 15 have inspired many positive and encouraging comments from residents. Shortly after the Zoutpansberger shared Michael’s story, a friend of his, Danie Moolman, took the opportunity to share the article as well. In doing so, he drew the attention of a generous donor, who came forward with the gift of a new wheelchair. Michael’s journey with paralysis because of a long-undiscovered tumour in his spine began at the age of 15. Even then, he did not have much support and no medical aid. In the years since then, he refused to give up, no matter how much he wanted to when the inevitable “down” days came. Sometimes he has aid with the medical costs of the treatments he needs, and sometimes he does not. He just gets on with things as best he can, and somehow succeeds in being grateful and positive most of the time. When the Zoutpansberger originally interviewed him, the very obviously decrepit and dangerous state of his wheelchair elicited wonder as to how anyone could be grateful for it. Yet Michael was grateful for that chair. “I would never have got around at all without it,” he said. “It was a blessing, albeit a sometimes-painful one.” The new wheelchair, however, has him grinning from ear to ear. Even though he is in constant pain that varies but never quite disappears, Michael says that one of the big joys of his life has been playing bowls, and this new chair has elevated that pleasure to new heights for him. His goal of walking again, even in the face of the new diagnosis of cancer, is always on his mind. “I exercise every day,” he says. “No matter how long it takes.” That might be where the problem lies. He currently does not have medical aid, and while trying to raise the funds to pay for the crucial trip to Pretoria for an MRI and the outcome of his last radiation treatment, the physiotherapy that could be lifechanging for him is not even a possibility. Michael says that he cannot thank Danie Moolman enough for his efforts in not only getting him a new chair but in finding the perfect one. “I can just picture him test-driving them himself,” says Michael with a chuckle. Amusing as this sounds, the newspaper can confirm that this is exactly what Danie did. He let us know of his progress over the past few weeks, first in finding funding and then finding the perfect chair. “Thank you so much to both Danie and the wonderful lady, Nicolene Viljoen, who helped to pay for it. You have made such a huge difference to my life, and I will be eternally grateful,” says Michael. Danie lives in Pretoria and could thus not be present when Michael received his new chair. However, he sent this message with it: “I wish you enough of everything, Michael, so that you will never have too much pain nor too little faith or love, and that all your needs will be fulfilled. Enjoy every turn of the wheel. You deserve it.” If anyone would like to assist towards medical bills or the cost of physiotherapy all donations will be greatly appreciated via the Round Table Louis Trichardt. Account details, with the reference Michael Deysel, are account name Round Table 66, First National Bank, account number 528 668 32 804, branch code 260149. 