At the age of 15, Michael Deysel (29) of Louis Trichardt felt something pop in his back, followed by pain and numbness in his lower back. That was just the beginning of the harrowing journey that this brave young man has undertaken ever since. “I got back from the latest radiotherapy treatment on the weekend,” he said, seated at his desk where he works at P&L’s Warehouse as he began to share his story. He is clearly not someone to take sick days lightly. The doctor he went to 14 years ago diagnosed his pain as the result of stress. The pain persisted, however, and so he began physiotherapy. This kept him mobile, although he was still in pain. Even after many consultations with doctors, hospitals, and other health professionals, Michael’s tumour remained undiscovered and misdiagnosed. He stayed determined throughout, and in 2009 he began to play rugby. The pain then decreased substantially until 2013, when it returned suddenly and with a vengeance. This time the pain was intense and constant and culminated in his losing his mobility completely. Finally, in 2014, a doctor he went to see informed him that he was too young to be in so much pain for no readily apparent reason and referred him to a spinal specialist in Polokwane. The specialist could see nothing unusual on the X-rays of his spine and sent him for an MRI straight afterwards. When the results came through, a non-cancerous tumour was finally diagnosed. It was situated in his spine in a position too close to his nervous system to remove all of it easily. This proximity to the spinal nervous system got Michael referred to a neurosurgeon, and four operations followed, leaving his right leg paralysed. For the rest of that year, Michael put all that he could into learning to walk again. Another MRI in 2015 revealed that the tumour had grown significantly, and emergency surgery was needed once again. When he woke up from this operation, he could once again feel his right leg, but his left foot had become completely floppy and unusable. Later the same year, a new cyst was found on his spine in addition to the tumour. Another operation on his spine got rid of the cyst, but with the tumour situated where it was, it could still not be completely removed. Michael was then given five weeks of radiation therapy, which slowed the growth of the tumour, but the nerve damage in his foot worsened. Multiple treatments and operations have all so far failed to remove the tumour, and Michael was informed in January 2018 that further surgery on his spine had become too risky. Several radiation treatments followed, as well as radiation surgery. In May this year, the MRI revealed three new tumours, one of them cancerous. Michael starts radiation again on 13 September. Throughout all these treatments, Michael has remained steadfast and continues to support himself completely. Apart from one much-appreciated donation from the Round Table, which helped him buy the brace that he is now using in his constant quest to walk again, he has only himself to rely on. His wheelchair is ancient and appears dangerous, with the seat section barely there. The rest of it is also hanging on by a thread. Despite obviously being in desperate need of a new chair, Michael has never asked for handouts or complained about his illness. In fact, he has made a point of inspiring other people who have also been experiencing negative life events. After 14 years of constant pain and challenges that must have been terrifying for such a young man to have to endure all on his own, he now plays bowls at the Louis Trichardt clubhouse, despite being wheelchair-bound. He gets up every day and goes to work with a smile on his face. He has no idea where money will come from for his future treatments, now that his medical fund has run dry, but he has no plans of giving up. “I’ve never had the will to quit,” he says. “I draw my strength from God. He knows the plans He has for all of us, and I believe that if we continue to fight, we will get rewarded. I want to live, and so I will never give up.” 