The National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) has warned citizens that malaria transmission is ongoing in South Africa and its neighbouring countries. In a press release, the NICD warns that the number of malaria cases is expected to rise as a result of travel during the Easter holidays, and the recent widespread rainfall across southern Africa. “All residents and travellers to and from malaria-transmission areas remain at risk,” says the NICD. In South Africa, this includes the north-eastern parts, covering the Mopani and Vhembe districts of Limpopo Province, as well as the western parts of the Waterberg district (Thabazimbi and Lephalale areas). “Other areas of high-transmission risk include the lowveld of Mpumalanga Province, including the Kruger National Park and surrounds, and the northern KwaZulu-Natal Province-Mozambique border,” says the NICD. The NICD urges travellers to high-transmission areas in South Africa, as well as to the neighbouring countries, to take precautions against being bitten by mosquitoes through the meticulous use of repellents containing DEET, covering bare skin after dark if outside, closing insect screens on doors and windows, and using fans or air conditioners, if available. “Travellers can also consult their doctors, clinics or pharmacists for anti-malarial chemoprophylaxis. Current recommended chemoprophylactic medications include doxycycline or atovaquone-proguanil, which are available without prescription, but the healthcare worker needs to advise the best option for each individual,” says the NICD. They add, however, that it should be noted that whilst these medications are very good at preventing malaria, they are not 100% effective. “All travellers, whether travelling to low- or high-risk areas, are advised to be aware of the malaria symptoms of fever, chills, sweats, headaches, nausea and vomiting, body aches and general malaise, and to report to their nearest health facility or doctor if they suspect that they may have contracted malaria, even if they have used the preventive measures listed above,” says the NICD.