The Kremetart Hall in AFB Makhado’s Braambos housing area played host to the Limpopo Junior Closed Badminton Tournament that took place on 17 March. The children could compete in two categories, namely primary school and high school. The results are as follows: The singles girls primary school category was won by Shenelle Francis from Louis Trichardt Primary (LTT Primary), while Wilhelm Claasens (LTT Primary) won the boys' category. Second and third place in the boys' category went to Eben Roy (Pemps Polokwane) and Micheal Claassens (LTT Primary) respectively. Wilhelm also won the boys' doubles primary category together with Eben, while the mixed doubles primary school category was scooped up WG de Villiers (LTT Primary) and Shenelle Frances. In the singles girls' high school category, top honours went to Esther Roy (Rusplaas Christian Model School), while second place went to Danielle Dreyer from Louis Trichardt High School  with Celeste Dreyer (LTT High) in third place. The singles category for high school boys was won by Benjamin de Waal (LTT High) with Dirk de Waal (LTT High) in second place and Daniel de Waal (LTT High) third. Esther, together with team mate Rochelle Fletcher (LTT High), also managed to win the doubles category for high school girls. Celeste and Danielle took second place, while Angelique Humphries and Simone Strydom (LTT High) finished third. As for the doubles category for high school boys, first place went to Daniel and Benjamin, while second place went to Wilhelm from Louis Trichardt Primary and Dirk. Diaan Harmse (LTT High) and Simeon Scheepers (home schooling) were third. The winners of the final category, that of mixed doubles for high school children, was won by Esther and Benjamin. Dirk and Danielle were second with Rochelle and Daniel finishing in third place. “The Limpopo Badminton Association would like to sincerely thank Blompjesvlei for sponsoring the medals that were presented to all the children,” said the organisers. For more information about the Limpopo Badminton Association, phone Sarel van der Walt at Tel 082 381 0326.