The Makhado Municipality has yet to clarify what the future holds for Louis Trichardt based sport clubs. Several weeks have passed without the municipality responding to questions put to them regarding the relocation of the clubs’ facilities to make way for developing Makhado Crossing into a regional shopping mall. As construction of the new mall progresses day by day, so too is confusion increasing on the relocation of the town’s sport clubs. It was first reported that all the sport clubs east of Makhado Crossing would have to be relocated to make way for the new mall. The facilities to be moved included the jukskei, rugby, soccer and netball fields, as well as the squash club and the adjacent hall that houses the gymnastics, badminton and wrestling clubs. When the development of the mall finally kicked off in January this year, it was made clear that only the rugby, soccer and netball fields would be affected by the current phase of construction and demolition works. The squash club and gymnastics hall would not count among those clubs that needed to be relocated, it was stated. Ever since the development of the mall was announced, it has been an on-off affair for the gymnastics and squash clubs. Initially both clubs would have been relocated to an area next to the show grounds. The clubs then made a proposal to rather be relocated to an area adjacent to the municipal swimming pool in Anderson Street. When ground clearing started in January this year it was made clear at stakeholders’ meetings that the relocation of both facilities will not be necessary. In recent weeks, however, rumours would suggest that it is already a done deal and that both facilities will have to relocate. It has, however, been extremely difficult to get to the bottom of these rumours. The representatives of the gymnastics clubs said, when speaking to the newspaper, that as far as they are concerned it has always been a done deal that they would have to relocate. They were, however, not sure exactly by when they would have to relocate. Their neighbours, over at the squash course, however, were shocked to learn that their relocation was on the discussion table again. As far as their representatives were concerned, there were talks of relocating but that it was dismissed when it was revealed that the mall’s development would not include their property. So who is right? This remains to be seen as the Makhado Municipality remains mute on the situation. Not only were they repeatedly asked to clarify the matter, but they were also mute as to questions regarding the current state of the rugby club. The rugby club representatives have also indicated that they are in the dark about what is going on with their relocation. The only information they have, stems from what was discussed during the meetings that were held in January and February. During these meetings, the rugby club was informed that there were temporary plans in place to facilitate their relocation. As soon as the ground clearing is finished, it was indicated to the club, their club house will be demolished up to the pavilion. This means that the club will still have grass to play on, but no spectator stands. For this, Masingita (the developer) proposed temporary stands and a mobile container-based bar and clubhouse. Ground clearing was scheduled to be completed by the end of April, with Masingita expressing the hope that by then they will have started to lay down the new rugby fields east of the show grounds. The rugby club told the newspaper last week that they sincerely hope that this would still be the case. Ever since then, their enquiries and concerns have fallen on deaf ears, both at the municipality and with Masingita.  The club has indicated that they have consulted with their legal representative to assist them dealing with the Makhado Municipality in so far as it concerns the club’s existing lease agreement. The club has not been asked to sign a new agreement. This, coupled with the uncertainty of their relocation, said the club, could force them to take legal action in the form of a court interdict to halt Masingita’s works so that the paperwork can first be finalised. In the meantime, the newspaper still awaits clarification from the Makhado Municipality. Apart from all the follow-up questions, municipal spokesperson Mr Louis Bobodi was also asked to arrange a meeting with the relevant people working on the project at the municipality. The meeting request was forward to him on Thursday, 12 April. He this week stated that he was out of the office on Monday and Tuesday. One of the burning questions remains how Council can allow the sports facilities to be demolished, even though the clubs still have legal lease agreements in place with the municipality?