The Easter weekend was a sad one for local fire and rescue workers. Instead of being the ones coming to the aid of others, members of the Makhado Fire Station in Louis Trichardt had to attend an accident scene in which one of their own had sadly passed away. The accident, in which Mr Jeremiah Mpho Selepe (32) passed away, occurred on Saturday along Rissik Street in Louis Trichardt. Selepe was on his way to attend to an accident scene in which an unknown woman passed away when she apparently lost control over her vehicle along the Elim road. On Tuesday, the exact cause of Selepe’s accident was still being investigated by the local authorities. A preliminary report states that Selepe and a fellow firefighter were on their way to attend to the accident that was reported to the station at approximately 14:00. Selepe was driving in the station’s Land Cruiser reaction vehicle when he collided with another vehicle in the Grobler and Rissik Street intersection. According to Mr Livhuwani Maake, who stays close to the accident scene, he found the crashed Land Cruiser with its emergency lights still on. He spoke to the newspaper on Tuesday. He said he was furious when he learnt that the accident was allegedly caused by a third vehicle that had failed to stop at the four-way stop street. Witnesses allegedly recalled seeing a white Toyota Corolla speeding through the intersection at high speed in a north-south direction via Grobler Street. Selepe, who was also speeding through the intersection, apparently attempted to avoid crashing into the Corolla by swerving but crashed into a third vehicle that was travelling in the opposite direction. Selepe was declared dead on the scene. His colleague was transported to the Elim Hospital where he was receiving treatment for serious cuts and bruises that he sustained in the crash. By Tuesday, he was still too traumatized to talk to the police about what he had witness during the accident. The driver and one passenger of the other vehicle involved in the crash also sustained severe cuts and had to be taken to hospital for medical treatment. This fatal accident made it impossible for local rescue workers to celebrate the fact that they had attended fewer accidents than during the same Easter period in the previous year. During last year’s Easter Weekend, the Makhado Fire Station reported a total of 10 accidents, with only one fatality. This year, the station reported only five accidents, but with two fatalities. As the long weekend approached, the first accident occurred on Thursday, 30 March, along the N1 south. Two vehicles, driving in opposite directions, collided with each other. Only two people sustained minor injuries. On Good Friday, rescue workers had to give assistance to a woman who had lost control over her vehicle near the turn-off junction on the N1 south towards the Air Force Base Makhado. No accidents were reported on Sunday. On Monday, the last accident for Easter Weekend was reported along the busy N1 north. A bus and bakkie, travelling in opposite directions, collided with each other. Both the vehicles came to a complete standstill in the middle of the road, partially blocking traffic along the N1. Three people were left with serious injuries, while a fourth sustained minor cuts and bruises. In the meantime, Selepe’s accident has sparked outrage amongst residents towards motorists who do not adhere to traffic rules. A growing trend seems to be developing in Louis Trichardt for motorists to ignore stop signs blatantly. “After seeing the accident scene … witnessing the man’s [Selepe] lifeless body covered underneath a blanket … and all because some idiot did not care to stop at a stop sign … I have urged all my family and friends to stop at a stop sign in future,” remarked a furious and upset resident, who wished to remain anonymous. The Makhado Police have since been alerted to the additional information and they have called on the public to assist them with any further information that can help to bring the culprits to book. Anyone with information can contact local police spokesperson Const Irene Radzilane at Tel 082 688 2361 or the charge office at 015 516 4300.