With criminals generally being more active over the festive season, Limpopo police have announced that they arrested more than 700 suspects in several joint operations across the province. “These simultaneous operations were running for twenty-four hours in all the clusters, especially in the crime-infested areas, including all Ports of Entry,” said provincial police spokesperson Col Moatshe Ngoepe in a press release on Wednesday. The intelligence-driven operations resulted in the arrest of 722 suspects between the ages of 18 and 69 for various offences, including the contravention of the Immigration Act, the Road Traffic Act, theft, TRIO crimes, assault, armed robbery, possession of suspected stolen property, dealing in drugs and more. Various police units at all stations, including the Public Order Police Unit and the Tactical Response Team (TRT), took part, with the operations being conducted through, among others, road blocks, stop-and-search operations, patrols and the tracing of wanted suspects. In the Mankweng policing area, two suspects aged 35 and 45 were arrested for the possession of an unlicensed firearm and ammunition. An R5-rifle and 97 rounds of live ammunition were recovered. Meanwhile, in the Hoedspruit policing area, a 69-year-old man was arrested at Molalane village, also for the illegal possession of ammunition. During the arrest, 519 rounds of live ammunition and eight home-made silencers were recovered. In the Makhado policing area, a 42-year-old man was arrested for house robbery, with the police recovering a Toyota Quantum, two couches and a table. According to Ngoepe, various items were recovered during the operations, with an estimated value of over R2 million. This included 17 motor vehicles, 25 firearms (including rifles, magazines and ammunition), 17 cellphones, six laptops and four televisions. Following the operations, the provincial commissioner of the SAPS, Lieutenant-General Nneke Ledwaba, praised the men and women in blue for their dedication and commitment displayed during these operations. “The arrested suspects have already started appearing before different Magistrate Courts throughout the province. The police investigations in all these cases are still continuing,” said Ngoepe. 