The Project Trap Neuter Return (TNR) team in Louis Trichardt held their first ever open art expo the past weekend to help raise funds for the project. “Project TNR Louis Trichardt would like to take this opportunity to thank the public who supported our first Open Art Expo, which was held at the Mountain Inn Country Hotel. Local artists Christine Bryan and Angela Versari, as well as husband and wife team Elna and Trevor Le Roux from Polokwane, exhibited a mix of art styles which included acrylics, oils, charcoal and some very interesting mixed-medium pieces,” said local TNR member Laura van Zyl. Project TNR offers a humane solution to stabilise and reduce overpopulation of feral, street or free-roaming community cats. “We are constantly on the lookout for ways to raise funds for this worthy project. Neutering and post-surgery care is costly and we rely entirely on cash donations and fundraising efforts,” said Van Zyl. As part of the Expo, three pieces of art were donated to be sold in aid of Project TNR. It included an oil-on-canvas painting with the title Cats on the Corner and two hand-stitched tapestries, Horses Grazing and Sylvester the Tuxedo. The painting is by Zelda Cloete (art teacher at St Albans College), while Elaine Davis was instrumental in arranging this cat-related artwork to be painted specifically for the Project TNR Louis Trichardt's fundraising. The tapestries were respectively donated by Betsy Roets and Dr Jolani Klopper. “Unfortunately, there were no takers on the day, but we will soon be putting these artworks up for sale online – so, please find us on Facebook and like our page,” said Van Zyl. Van Zyl added that they would continue with the exhibitions. “We plan to continue with the art exhibitions every four months, so we encourage artists to get creative and work on some pieces for our next Open Art Expo, which will be announced early next year. Next time, we will keep the art on exhibit for three days, which will give the public a bigger window of opportunity to visit,” said Van Zyl. The Project TNR team sincerely thanked the community for their care and support of these cats. They also thanked Dennis and Vicki from Mountain Inn, who not only have their own working cat colony, but also regularly support and afford them fundraising opportunities. “I would personally like to express my gratitude for Marinda van der Walt [chairperson of Project TNR Louis Trichardt] who has made a real difference in our community for our community cats. Marinda works many long hours in the field, humanely trapping feral cats that are then neutered by the vets at Blouberg Animal Clinic, after which they receive a few days of home care recovery before they are returned to the outdoor locations where they were found. It’s hard work hauling those heavy traps and cages around, especially when it contains a feisty feral angrily trying to escape!” said Van Zyl. People wishing to support Project TNR Louis Trichardt through financial donations are welcome to do so by making deposits into account name Blouberg Dierekliniek, Standard Bank Louis Trichardt, account number 330 194 402. As reference, use the letters TNR, followed by your name (eg. TNR Marlize). Proof of payment should then kindly be send to projecttnrltt@gmail.com.