The end-of-year holiday season is a time of celebration for most people, with excess being the order of the day as far as eating, drinking, and spending are concerned. For people with genuine addiction problems, this season with all its parties and get-togethers can be a difficult time. The Zoutpansberger heard from more than one alcoholic who, although they have not ingested any alcohol for many years, still do not want anyone who does not already know what they suffer from to find out. They have, however, agreed to share a few words and tips for holiday survival, on condition of anonymity. The gentle respect with which members of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) treat everyone was a common thread with both the interviewees here. In an open letter to the media on the AA website, they “respectfully request that you continue to cooperate with us in maintaining the anonymity of AA members. The principle of anonymity is a basic tenet of our fellowship. Those who are reluctant to seek our help may overcome their fear if they are confident that their anonymity will be respected. In addition, and perhaps less understood, our tradition of anonymity acts as a restraint on A.A. members, reminding us that we are a programme of principles, not personalities, and that no individual A.A. member may presume to act as a spokesman or leader of our fellowship. If an A.A member is identified in the media, we ask that you please use first names only…” The Zoutpansberger will use noms de plume in the forms of simply A and B in this instance. “I have not had a drink in over 15 years,” said A. “I doubt that anyone who knows me now would believe you if you told them what I am, and I do not attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings in Louis Trichardt, because I would like it to remain that way.” There is a stigma attached to alcoholism that makes most of those who suffer from this illness try their very best to hide it away, even though, according to B, medical aid schemes pay for rehab for both alcohol and drug addictions all the time. “Medical aids are not going to pay for anything frivolous, so the fact that they do pay for these things, just as they happily pay for diabetes and other diseases, should make people more aware of the fact that these addictions are real and serious sicknesses.” “I still get cravings,” said A. “Not often these days, and I have no problem socialising with alcohol drinkers. If I have a craving that gets large enough, I have a friend I phone. So far, so good.” B, on the other hand said that it was a daily struggle. “Stay away from the first drink and remember that your body as an alcoholic reacts differently. Take it one day at a time.” Both A and B say that admitting that they are alcoholics, regardless of how many years it has been since they have actually had a drink, almost always elicits disgust. A said that it had been a long time since a craving managed to get the better of him. “Levels of difficulty vary and so, even though I do not have any alcoholic friends locally, I do make sure that I have others only a quick phone call away. All that I need now is a cure for my pizza habit.” B also emphasises that the support of others who will understand and empathise is a must. A told the Zoutpansberger that, over the past few years, the work he had done to stay sober had helped him with other, more commonly dangerous behaviour over the Christmas season. “I am not as likely to spend money that I do not have with the impulsivity of my past, and apart from the pizza, I do not spend huge amounts on special food. Expensive gifts are in my past. I focus on caring for people more than I do on spending money on people now.” On the subject of money, B said that “AA do not accept donations and are completely self-supporting in every way. We give and accept our time and care.” On their website, AA suggest only celebrating with other non-drinkers during the festive season if you feel that you cannot cope with being exposed to alcohol at this point. That way, you do not have to be left out. More tips for celebrating the holidays alcohol-free can be found on the AA South Africa website at www.aasouthafrica.org.za. Any Louis Trichardt residents who believe that they may need help in this regard are reminded that local AA groups are available to contact for help and support, anonymity guaranteed, and listed in the Zoutpansberger’s What Is Happening section every week. 