According to Bennie Visser, who owns BD Smart, his interest in home security started because of several attempted and one successful burglary at his home. The one time that thieves did manage to get into his house, they stole some items high in monetary value but, according to Bennie, what mattered more than anything was that his family were not harmed in any way. It could have gone a lot worse if the burglars had decided to enter the bedrooms where they were asleep. “People must keep in mind that these thieves will get in if they really want to. The most important things to have when considering your home security are noise, light, and time.” Visser says that, first and foremost, you need a warning system for when an intruder crosses the perimeter of your property. You do not want to wake up to find a burglar looking down at you as you lie in your bed. “Installing a security gate inside your home between your sleeping areas and the main part of the house or flat is a good idea. That way, your family are likely to remain safe if intruders do get in, and you can then call for assistance.” He says that a tight budget is no reason not to take measures to secure your home as best you can. An alarm is ideal as a first line of defence, says Visser, and depending on what you can afford you can either go for a fully installed system that covers all the entrances to your home, with or without an armed response service, or small contact alarms for doors and windows. These are very reasonably priced and work very well when it comes to making a noise, he says. Visser says that security cameras are a great deterrent and a means of collecting visual evidence of criminals, should a burglary actually take place. This can work out to be expensive, but depending on what you have to protect, closed-circuit television systems can prove to be lifesavers. These systems allow you to view remotely any areas where you have cameras installed from the safety of your house. Electric fencing is not cheap, he says, but very effective. If you do have an electric fencing system installed, have it done properly by reputable installers. Lighting is crucial, according to Visser, when it comes to home security. Whether you have a lighting system connected to your alarm or motion detectors or not, you must have outside lights. He recommends that you have lights that shine away from your house. This will not only give you a good view of your outside areas, it will also impair the vision of thugs trying to look in at you. This is another aspect of home security that does not have to cost a fortune, says Visser. Halogen floodlights can be bought very cheaply and installed by homeowners themselves. Investigate panic button systems for the elderly or the young. Have small dogs inside your home if possible. Keep a tin of pepper spray close. Many ways exist to protect your family and your property, says Visser, but one very important thing is for people to make sure that they always have back-up power. Electricity breakers can be turned off outside of fence perimeters by would-be burglars, so have back-up batteries for alarm systems and make sure that you always have alternative sources of light. Small solar-powered lights are readily and cheaply available. Have good quality burglar bars on your windows and doors, Visser advises, and keep bedroom windows closed while your family are sleeping. Always be vigilant when it comes to home security, and never let your guard down. If you have had false alarms, he says, do not ignore fresh alarms because criminals do not give up. 