The Louis Trichardt SPCA has urged residents not to give people pets as presents this Christmas. According to the local SPCA, the weeks following Christmas, with March being one of their busiest months, many animals are either surrendered to the SPCA or simply abandoned. This week the SPCA’s Alicia Thomas is reminding people that pets are more than presents. “Pets given as gifts are done so with good intentions, but mostly giving pets as gifts is a bad idea,” said Alicia. Alicia said that people who gave animals as gifts meant well, but their good intensions often misfired. “Giving a pet as a gift is usually an ill-advised decision that can end tragically. While it is true that pets bring us untold joy and wonderful companionship, they are a huge responsibility. People who receive a pet as a gift don't pay, but the gift is hardly free. It means a long-term commitment of time, money and energy that may exceed their abilities,” said Alicia. Among the costs of keeping a pet are food, bedding and toys, veterinary care, grooming expenses, the cost of time to exercise, play with and train the animal. Alicia said that some people did not want a pet at all, or perhaps did not want one now. “For those who are ready, it is crucial that he or she pick a pet out for herself to make sure it's a good fit. A poor fit can mean the animal is sent to a shelter or another home, which is hard on the pet and on the person who received the animal as a gift. Some pets suffer loneliness and neglect when their novelty has worn off,” said Alicia. A successful adoption requires time and thought, said Alicia. “Like a lot of gifts, animals can be impulse purchases. Pet adoption is more successful when you meet a few animals before finding the right match. Ideally, adopters should research to learn what traits they want before visiting a shelter or purchasing a pet from a shop or a breeder, before making the important decision of choosing a pet. So, please remember - pets don't make good presents!” said Alicia. 