In December last year, pastors from various denominations and representatives from Musina Municipality converged on the N1 road to pray against the high number of road accidents during the festive season. Their prayers were heard as it was confirmed by the local traffic authority that no fatal accidents occurred in the Musina municipal area during the festive season. Last Saturday, the congregants, law enforcement officers and councillors converged again to thank the Lord for answering their prayers. They came together in the spot where the legendary late Bafana Bafana and Orlando Pirates soccer star, Lesley "Slow Poison" Manyathela, lost his life in a car accident on 9 August 2003. The spot is approximately 28km out on the N1 North between the Baobab Toll Gate and the Sasol Garage. One of the organizers of the event, Pastor Joseph Salani, said it was important to go back to the spot and thank the Lord for sparing many lives during the festive season. “The Bible tells us that our Lord is a good listener, who only needs people who are dedicated in prayer. We had no doubt that our prayers will be heard, because we serve a living God. This is a testimony that our God cares for those who ask and pray unceasingly. We will continue to ask Him to protect everyone on our roads because He is the one who gave us life.” The manager responsible for traffic at Musina Municipality, Mr Ailwei Mutele, said it was important to seek divine intervention to stop accidents on the roads. “There are other things that we as human beings cannot accomplish without intervention by the Lord. As law-enforcement officers, we are doing our best to make sure that everyone is safe on our roads, but we need assistance from God to achieve our set road safety goals.” Mutele thanked the pastors, congregants, stakeholders and government departments that took part in the thanksgiving prayer session. He warned that his team of traffic officers would be out in full force to maintain law and order on all the roads around Musina. “We warn all traffic offenders that there will be no mercy for those who violate the rules of the road. We want to make sure that everyone is safe on our roads.”