The newly appointed general manager of De Beers Venetia Mine, Mr Gerrie Nortjé, said he was committed to the continued development of the mine and the communities in which they operate. Nortjé was addressing members of the media during a breakfast session held at the Venetia Guesthouse in Musina on Monday. The session was meant to introduce Nortjé to members of the media. He replaces Mr Benford Mokoatle, who left the mine for greener pastures after serving for 11 months. Nortjé is not a novice to the mining industry. He worked as assistant general manager responsible for production for a year at the same mine before his new appointment. He also boasts several years of experience in senior management positions at both the Anglo and Xstrata mining houses. Nortjé said it was important for the mine to develop a good working relationship with members of the media to accelerate community engagement. “The media play a very critical role in community development and as such, we should embrace them as part of our big family at Venetia Mine. We are looking forward to a continued engagement with the media to share information that will improve the lives of our people." He added that open conversations such as these, assists them to communicate the successes of their social labour plans to their communities easily. "It is through the media that community members should know that we have spent millions of rands to improve services in our labour-sending areas.” He added that he would continue with the mine’s commitment to ‘safety first’ and ‘zero harm’ while, at the same time, consolidating the employer’s obligation of encouraging a good-health lifestyle among all employees. “We care much about our employees because they are the driving force behind our success. These are the people who will help us to achieve our objective of converting our operations from open-pit to underground mining. Let me take this opportunity to inform members of the media that our open-pit mining is expected to continue until 2021 and production in the underground mine is scheduled to commence in 2022 and continue to 2043.” The editor of the Limpopo Mirror, Mr Wikus Lee, was one of the representatives of the various media houses who attended the media breakfast session. “We take the invitation very seriously, because we regard Venetia Mine as an important content provider in our news room. We will continue to build our already blossoming relationship with various stakeholders, including De Beers Venetia Mine, to improve the lives of our people through development journalism,” Lee said.