The Levubu SAPS are investigating a case of murder after one of their members was stabbed to death by unknown suspects on Monday night at his house. The police identified the deceased as W/O Alugumi Nemugumoni (54). He was allegedly attacked when he arrived home after work. The police officer’s death raises more questions than answers as no one can explain exactly what had happened. After news of Nemugomoni’s death broke, the police services in Limpopo were plunged into deep mourning. Nemugomoni was stationed at the Levubu Police Station. Family spokesperson Ms Avheani Radzilani said Nemugumoni’s death had left them devastated. “Nemugumoni was a unifier and leader in the family, and we had hoped that, with his wisdom, he would lead us for many years. His death left a void that will be hard to fill,” she said. Radzilani added that her brother was helping to teach the village to combat crime. “He was a pillar of strength to the family and the whole community,” Radzilani said. Police spokesperson Brig Motlafela Mojapelo said that the death of Nemugomoni was a great loss to the Department of Safety and Security and the community as a whole. He described Nemugomoni as a brave policeman, who was loyal to the department and to his fellow men. He urged the police not to hesitate to defend themselves, their colleagues and the community. “We have given you the equipment and trained you how to use them. We cannot allow you to die with your guns and your magazines full of bullets,” he said. Mojapelo urged the community to “say enough is enough against crime and expose all criminals in order to stop police killings.” He said that anyone who attacked a police officer was undermining the government. The community must not allow police officers to be “killed like chickens” said Mojapelo.  He said that the police were not going to be threatened by a minority of criminals. The funeral service will start at 06:00 on Sunday at the deceased’s home and proceed to the Tshakhuma Luvhalani Cemetery for burial. The deceased is survived by his wife and four children.