Only one person objected to the proposed sale of three more portions of the remainder of Erf 4296, a prime piece of land just west of the N1 and falling within Louis Trichardt’s controversial greenbelt area. For years now, conservationists have mostly succeeded in preventing any development in the town’s sensitive greenbelt area. That all changed when well-known local businessman Mr Rampie Gilfillan eventually succeeded in getting the go-ahead for the building of a motor city on a 2,5ha piece of land in the greenbelt area (next to the town’s cricket fields) as part of Erf 4296. Regarding this, construction work is at present well underway. During the 84th Council meeting of the Makhado Municipality on 26 October 2017, notice was given of the proposed sale by private contract of three more portions of Erf 4296, situated between Rissik and Songozwi Street. In all three cases, the developers seek to buy the properties for business development. The three developers are Mr T E Netshiongolwe (executive director of Viato Projects), Mr H Musandiwa and Messrs J Gilfillan and H Muswobi. Netshiongolwe’s application is the only one indicating what kind of business development he is planning, which includes a McDonald’s restaurant. Following above-mentioned Council meeting, the Makhado Municipality advertised the notice of the proposed sale for objections in the Zoutpansberger’s sister publication, the Limpopo Mirror, of 1 December 2017. The advertisement stated that residents wishing to object had until 20 December to file their objections with the municipality. Municipal spokesperson Mr Louis Bobodi stated last week that the municipality’s department of development had only received one objection. He did not want to identify the objector. “We can’t mention names, but it is between the objector and the municipality,” said Bobodi. He explained that the objector had argued that the property in question should be sold by tender or public auction. As for now, Bobodi added, the municipality is yet to appoint a professional surveyor to determine the exact size of the remaining portion suitable for development. “This has not yet been done and the municipality will not go ahead with the sale before a professional surveyor is appointed. The sale is subject to the report of the surveyor and also environmental consideration,” said Bobodi. Unbeknown to many, the sale of another prime piece of business property immediately opposite Erf 4296, Erf 1 east of the N1 in Eltivillas, is already at an advanced state. Council already took a decision to sell the property consisting of four portions during their 82nd Council meeting in April last year. Notice of the proposed sale for objections to be raised was advertised on 16 June last year, again only in the Limpopo Mirror. Council decided to sell the property after receiving four requests from four developers for the development of restaurants. The developers are Mr Dladlama B (3000m²), Ms P Lishiba (3000m²), Mr AB Vahid (6000m²) and Mr SA Kalla on behalf of Autumn Property Investments (4000m²). Regarding Erf 1, Bobodi confirmed last week that no objections had been received against the proposed sale of the property. “The market values have been determined by a professional appraiser and the municipality will inform the applicants,” stated Bobodi. After this, Bobodi said, the municipality would enter into a sales agreement with the applicants. “Payment will be expected within 90 days after signing the deed-of-sale agreement. If payment is not received within 90 days, the deed of sale will be cancelled without notice,” said Bobodi. Bobodi did not want to confirm the sale amounts for the properties. “The matter is still confidential. The reason being that the applicants have not yet been informed of the value to be paid,” said Bobodi. In the meantime, Bobodi said, the municipality had already received rezoning applications, but they would not proceed before payment had been made and the registration of the properties was done. “In terms of the Council resolution, the purchaser must submit an application for the rezoning of the subdivided property for the purpose of a restaurant after the registration of property. One of the purchasers is intending to develop a Chicken Licken restaurant. As for the others [applicants], we do not know at this stage; however, the Council resolution is clear that development should be for restaurants,” Bobodi said. Council’s willingness to part with municipal land for development, including the Masingita Group of Companies’ current process of expanding Makhado Crossing into a regional shopping mall, has raised fear as to whether the town’s existing infrastructure will be able to cope. The biggest of these concern is the availability of electricity. The Makhado Municipality is already experiencing an electricity shortage, placing a 50kVa limit on all new developments. Another concern is road infrastructure. All three of the town’s intersections with the N1 are already severely congested, the worst being the Rissik Street/N1 and Songozwi Street/N1 junctions. As for the motor city development, the municipality has already indicated that direct access from the N1 will not be allowed. Likewise, direct access from the N1 regarding the Erf 1 Eltivillas development will not be allowed either. “Access will be from Commercial Street,” said Bobodi. This is bound to put an even bigger burden on the Rissik and Songozwi Street junctions with the N1. In terms of conservationists’ objection against any proposed development within the town’s greenbelt area, Bobodi confirmed that, at present, no environmental impact assessment has been done regarding the proposed development of Erf 1. Another problem many have with the sale of municipal property is why Council opts to use outside companies to value their property instead of local appraisers who have a better understanding of local market values. Bobodi was asked about this, where after he indicated that the valuation of the four portions of Erf 1 had been done by Vuma Valuation Services, a company from Kempton Park.