The Makhado Carnival Show in Louis Trichardt is still a no go. This was confirmed by Mr Ngereza Netshifhefhe of African Cornerstone Network who, in partnership with Lufune Communications, privately organised the carnival in place of the annual Makhado Show. Earlier this week, the Makhado Municipality issued a notice that it would not be hosting the Makhado Annual Show this year. Traditionally, the show takes place during the last week of July. In the same notice, the municipality distanced itself “from a person who is using its name ‘Makhado Annual Show’ to mobilize the community to the show. The municipality has no relationship with the person who claims that he or she will be hosting [the] Makhado Annual show during July 2018 and therefore we will not take responsibility to account for any act or omission occasioned by this fake annual show pretending to be held by the municipality. We apologise to the entire Makhado community for the inconveniences caused, although [it] is for better service delivery as the Mall seeks to create permanent employment for the people of Makhado.” The municipality was, in fact, referring to Netshifhefhe and company, who claimed they had booked and paid for hosting a “carnival” in place of the show on the show grounds from 26 to 28 July, traditionally the show-weekend dates. Netshifhefhe also indicated that all certificates and arrangements were in place to host the carnival safely. This, however, turned out not to be the case, with the Makhado SAPS putting a temporary halt to the opening of the carnival on Thursday morning. “He [Netshifhefhe] has not complied with any specifications of the Sport and Recreational Events Act, Act 2 of 2010,” said Makhado police spokesperson Const Irene Radzilane. “We told him he cannot open until he complies,” added Radzilane. During a telephonic interview with Netshifhefhe late Thursday morning, he admitted that indeed he did not have all the necessary certificates in place. He said, however, that he was in the process of having everything finalised. “But the show is going ahead,” said Netshifhefhe. By Friday morning, supposed to be the second day of the show, the gates had yet to open. “The police are making it tough for me,” said Netshifhefhe. At that stage, he was still trying to get all the necessary documentation in place to proceed with the carnival. Netshifhefhe indicated that he was being sabotaged. He said that, if necessary, he would get a court interdict to proceed with the carnival. “The status quo remains. The gates are closed. He [Netshifhefhe] has not complied yet,” said Radzilane on Friday morning when asked for comment. 