While a lot of attention is given to the plight of big game in the illegal wildlife trade, local animal advocates would like people to know more about what is happening to all the animals in the country, and what they can do to help them. According to the Louis Trichardt SPCA, an animal’s welfare should be considered in terms of the five freedoms, namely freedom from hunger and thirst, freedom from discomfort, freedom from pain, injury or disease, freedom to express normal behaviour and freedom from fear and distress. Senior inspector Lawrence Khodobo of the local SPCA pointed the newspaper in the direction of the National Council of SPCAs (NCSPCA) which is dedicated to the wellbeing and conservation of all our animals. Kotie Geldenhuys, who wrote the report Animal Smuggling and Illegal Trade for the NCSPCA, said that the primary motivating factor for wildlife traders was money, and it ranged from small-scale, local income generation to major profit-oriented business. “The illegal wildlife trade is usually driven by a demand for rare, protected species, which need to be smuggled in secret to get them out of the country … For every animal that makes it to a store, an auction, or new owner, countless others die along the way … Due to the very low survival rate, this also means that far higher numbers of animals are removed from the ecosystem to make up for losses,” said Geldenhuys. Khodobo said that any wild animal or bird found, whether injured or a baby animal or fledgling bird, must be taken to the SPCA. “All the wild animals received by our society go to an NCSPCA-accredited rehabilitation centre,” said Khodobo, adding that they have two of these centres in Limpopo. What the NCSPCA would like people to know is that wildlife is protected by law, and that people cannot just go out and catch any wild animal for any purpose that they have in mind. This is against the law. “Anyone intending to catch an indigenous animal in the open must be in possession of a permit from Nature Conservation in their respective province, and anyone failing to do so may face legal consequences. There is a good chance that an endangered species of field mouse or frog could be caught,” said the NCSPCA. “So, people must not think that ‘lesser’ creatures are fair game for them to catch and use as they will. This also applies to lizards, snakes and other reptiles that people think of as common,” said Khodobo. “In South Africa, an indigenous snake may not be kept in captivity without a permit – and the majority of provinces have adopted the policy not to issue permits for the domestic pet trade,” said the NCSPCA. “Concerns are threefold: pet reptiles can be harmful to human health, the reptile trade results in inhumane treatment of reptiles and it harms the environment and wild populations of reptiles and other wildlife,” the NCSPCA added. So, what can people do? The NCSPCA said that the smuggling of and illegal trading in wildlife are nothing new, and one is often amazed to discover what people have managed to smuggle and the way in which they have done it. “However, wild animals are not the only animals to be smuggled - even domestic animals are smuggled across South African borders,” said the NCSPCA. The NCSPCA is involved in enforcing the law relating to both wild and domestic animals. “The world is dealing with an unprecedented spike in illegal wildlife trade, which is threatening to overturn decades of conservation gains. The global trade in over-exploited, unsustainable and illegal wildlife is a multibillion dollar industry that is responsible for causing the maximum degree of harm to biodiversity in the shortest time frame,” said the NCSPCA. Wildlife crime is a big business that is run by international networks through which wildlife and animal parts are trafficked much like illegal drugs and arms. “This trafficking is a transnational crime that exploits porous borders, disadvantaged communities and corruption. The illegal wildlife trade is driven by high profit margins and low risk of interception, and it involves live animals and plants, as well as their parts or products. There is an extensive legal and illegal trade, both in South Africa and internationally,” said the NCSPCA. The NCSPCA wants the general public to be aware of what is happening to their wildlife heritage and to act appropriately, both in their treatment of animals and in reporting illegal or cruel activities without hesitation. “Raising awareness of how animal crime is conducted in South Africa empowers staff at ports of entry, not only to help them to be vigilant for animal welfare concerns and illegal operations, but also to increase their awareness of the associated crime that takes place using common animal transport avenues. Transnational animal trade and smuggling are not limited to wild animals. South Africans are often willing to breed and sell puppies to any willing buyer and readily give pets away ‘free to a good home’. This results in an easy and constant source of untraceable kittens and puppies. These animals cross our borders to whatever fate awaits them,” said the NCSPCA. A final word from our local SPCA. “We have a qualified inspector who is dedicated to protecting all animals and, where necessary, prosecuting any person who is caught wilfully abusing an animal. Our inspector will go to any length to rescue an animal which is in distress. He is on duty 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, to help and assist any animal in need of help,” said the local SPCA. 