The mayor of Musina, Cllr Mihloti Muhlope, said that the twinning agreement between Musina Municipality and the Beit Bridge District Rural Council in Zimbabwe was playing a developmental role in terms of international relations. Muhlope was addressing guests during the municipal status celebration of the Beit Bridge Town Council, which was held at the Rainbow Hotel, Beit Bridge, Zimbabwe last Thursday. This comes after the leader of Zimbabwe, Pres Emmerson Mnangagwa, upgraded the Beit Bridge Town Council to municipal status in March this year. This means that the town council will now have more responsibilities like other municipalities in Zimbabwe in terms of providing services to local people. Muhlope said the upgrading of the town council into a municipality came at the right time when Musina was preparing itself to become a city. “The upgrading of the town council into municipal status fits well into our municipality’s vision statement to become the gateway city to the rest of Africa. It is important to be surrounded by institutions that share the same vision with us, so that we can move the dreams of a sustainable African local government forward together.” She added that the current developments also served as a catalyst to strengthen the twinning agreement that they signed with the Beit Bridge District Rural Council in October 2004. “We agreed that we would work together on issues related to economic development, health, education, tourism and other service-delivery initiatives. As a border town, we wholeheartedly support this upgrading, because it will also have positive spin-offs for our people.” She said the future looked bright for the new municipality and pledged full support from the people of Musina. The mayor of the Municipality of Beit Bridge, Cllr Showa Moyo, thanked the government of Zimbabwe for upgrading the town council to municipal status. She also thanked Musina Municipality for the cooperation and timeous engagement on issues related to service delivery. Also present during the celebration were councillors from Zimbabwe, representatives from the Urban Council Association of Zimbabwe and the Zimbabwe Local Government Association, Zimbabwean politicians and representatives from community and government structures.