The local Kremetart race has become a local institution since its inception more than two decades ago, not only in Louis Trichardt, but across the whole Soutpansberg region. After a brief interlude, this year will see the Soutpansberg and its people host the 28th annual Kremetart Cycling Race during the weekend of 8 to 10 June. Due mostly to monetary constraints, the race had to be cancelled in 2017. But this year, thanks to enormous support from the local community, the Kremetart is once more able to continue. Over the years, this event has gone from strength to strength. From its humble beginnings, the Kremetart attracted mostly local entries from the area, and the route did not even come close to covering the 175km it does today. As the race started to evolve, the route was changed to encompass the route around the Soutpansberg. Louis Trichardt is well known for its picturesque locality in the shade of the majestic Soutpansberg Mountain. The main race will take place around the Soutpansberg and offers panoramic views of the mountain. It finds its way past several stunning baobabs and other Bushveld vegetation. This route was first cycled way back in 1990, when it was known as the Venda Sun Kremetart Tour. A couple of years later, the race was rated as one of the top races in South Africa, even above big events such as the Cape Argus and the PicknPay 94.7 cycle races. At one stage, the race was selected as a qualifier for the Cape Argus. ‘Dynamic and vibrant’ is the phrase that comes to mind when describing this race that has a distinctively local vibe to it. (This does not only refer to the colourful groups of cyclists who will trek through Louis Trichardt and over the Soutpansberg). The whole community around the Soutpansberg has become involved to assist with this event over the years and has continued to do so up until now. For instance, the local Round Table will once again come to the fore with their popular potjiekos dinner, following the prize-giving function, and the communities of Waterpoort and Vivo will provide the meals during the race on the route. Did you know that Kobie’s breakfast soup served at Waterpoort has become legendary among cyclists?  The Schoemansdal School will provide the facilities at the end of Stage 3. Many other charitable community organisations also work behind the scenes, and through their participation and support, they are able to contribute to the welfare of the less fortunate in the local community. Apart from the 175km race, a shorter 70km road race will also be held and, for the first time ever, a 35km road race (for the less fit) on the Saturday. The every-popular Kremetart XCO mountain bike race will once again be held on the Sunday and will be a Limpopo qualifier as usual. Entries for the 175km race close on 15 May, as well as the entries for the 70km and 35km races, although cyclists can still enter for the 70km and 35km races on race day. NO late entries will be accepted for the 175km race. For entry forms and more information on the 175km, 70km and 35km races, visit http://kremetart.soutpansbergcycling.co.za/. To enter for the Kremetart XCO, visit www.webscorer.com. Many people totally unconnected with cycling have come on board for this year's race. From marketing, medics, physiotherapy, supporters, safety, traffic control, cleaning, maintenance, route layout, branding, timing, sweep and back-up vehicles to transport, electrical and venue layout - most come from the local community. This year marks the first year of substantial sponsorships from within the local community. Their generous input will once again ensure that this race will remain a proudly Soutpansberg event.