The Louis Trichardt SPCA would like to remind residents of their Wag ‘n Purr mornings that happen every Saturday between 10:00 and 12:00 at the SPCA kennels. Members of the public are encouraged to come and walk the dogs or to spend some quality kitty time in the cattery. For people who just love animals and want to give them a bit of affection, this is a great way to spend a couple of hours. This is meant to be a joyful experience where dogs get to play outdoors with humans, and cats and kittens can also get much-needed weekly doses of love. It also provides a wonderful opportunity for animal lovers who live in flats or, for some reason, are unable to own their own dog or cat to regularly help give a little happiness to some who would really appreciate it. A few horses and a donkey currently reside at the SPCA who would definitely enjoy a little human adoration and an apple or two. The SPCA’s Alicia Thomas would also like to remind dog and cat owners that Parvo (Cat Flu) is a deadly disease that can lead to thousands of rands in vet bills or an unnecessary death. “It would make a huge difference if people would vaccinate their puppies and kittens in good time,” said Alicia. This often fatal virus takes hold very quickly and is highly contagious, spreading easily for weeks after infection by a single animal. While it often infects puppies and young dogs, dogs or cats of any age can get Parvo, which is why the SPCA so strongly recommends that all owners make sure to vaccinate their furry friends against it. “Make sure that your dog or cat gets that 5-in-1 to avoid huge vet bills or a broken heart later. Find out what vaccinations will be needed and when, and then mark the dates on your calendar, so you remember to get them done on time,” said Alicia. Alicia says that not waiting until your pet is chronically ill before seeking help is essential. “As soon as you realise that something is wrong, seek professional help. Vomiting, diarrhoea or if your dog or cat looks to be in pain or depressed are signs to get assistance fast,” said Alicia. For more information, phone Alicia at Tel 084 900 5332.