Mrs Renuka Devendra Patel, who passed away peacefully on the evening of 24 September at the Limpopo Mediclinic in Polokwane, will be greatly missed by her family and the community of Louis Trichardt. Fondly known as Baboo, she generously shared her love not only with her family but with the entire community, serving and helping all who needed it. A pillar of the community, she was always involved in several events such as weddings, prayer ceremonies and festival celebrations. Always present, she would play leading roles in these as well as the festive celebrations of the Hindu community. Baboo’s brother Nitin shared memories of his charming sister's life. He told the Zoutpansberger that she was born at Elim Hospital in 1944 to Mr Kishorlal and Mrs Hansaben Mehta. The Mehta family were early pioneers and settlers in Louis Trichardt. They operated a thriving merchant and trading company in Kruger Street until the late 1960s, when the business started winding down and most of the Mehta family began leaving South Africa for other parts of the world. Renuka moved to Mumbai in India with her parents and baby brother, Mr Nitin Mehta. It was always their father’s dream to return to Louis Trichardt once his children were grown up and settled, but unfortunately he passed away prematurely in 1976 before his dream could be realised. “On numerous subsequent trips to South Africa, the family was welcomed openly by the love, generosity and affection of Mr B D Patel (Babookaka), a doyen of the community,” says Nitin. “That began to draw the family closer to the Patel (MACS) family.” Travelling back and forth between India and South Africa continued for many years, and it was during multiple visits with the Patels that the love story of Renuka and Devendra bloomed. Renuka was reluctant to move back to this country as she did not want to leave her mother and brother alone in Mumbai, but, says Nitin, love conquers all. After their wedding in Mumbai in May 1980, Renuka finally moved back to Louis Trichardt and the Patel and Mehta families united into one big family. Renuka is survived by her husband, Mr Devendra Baboobhai Patel, daughter Ms Minalli Patel, and her extended family. Nitin says his sister took it upon herself to look after all of them, mothering them, and showering them with unflinching love and care. “Baboo, even though you are not with us physically today, we know you are somewhere up there, a shining bright star, looking after us, caring for us, continuing to shower us with your love, and blessing us. Babs, Baboo, Babi, Baboofoi, Baboomasi, Babuben, Baboomami, Renu, Renuka -  we thank you for coming into our lives and leaving us with precious life lessons – lessons that each of us who have had the pleasure of knowing you will follow and continue to honour. You will be dearly missed. May God Bless you and may you rest in peace,” said Nitin. The Mehta and Patel families would like to express their heartfelt gratitude to all who have provided support during this trying time, thanking all for their kind words, condolences and concern towards the family. A special thank you to Dr Jameel Omar and the nurses at Limpopo MediClinic for their commitment and care to our beloved.