Several concerned residents have recently reported cases of attempted or successful burglaries to the Zoutpansberger, where property of varying value was stolen, but no injuries occurred. These crimes were mostly not reported to the police, as is common in Louis Trichardt. All of these residents have requested to remain anonymous, but one of them said that he would particularly like to share what had happened because he believed that his experience would be helpful to other people not expecting to be burgled. A homeowner in Grobler Street told the newspaper that three burglars had gained access to his home late on Saturday night. They forced open a security gate and a wooden door with a crowbar and gained access long enough for them to make off with a wallet containing cash, jewellery, several cellphones, and a drone, before the barking of the small resident dog disturbed them enough to make them leave. The homeowner then tracked their footprints and recovered his drone, which the burglars had dropped. He told the newspaper that several attempted burglaries had occurred on Grobler Street, all involving three would-be intruders, including at his mother’s home next to his, between Friday and Sunday. However, the criminals failed to gain entrance because of dogs and well-placed security gates. He said the fact that he had a security gate installed inside his home stopped the burglars from entering his bedroom while he slept, a fact for which he was grateful because their violent forcing of the front gate and door showed that they meant business. His small dog also was a saviour, he continued. “Even though such a small dog can’t really offer physical protection, the noise will at least wake you up, and when your dogs are inside, they can’t be poisoned by burglars while they’re preparing to break in.” He said that he was going to have some more lighting installed in the dark area where the burglars had gained access, as well as around the stoep where they had pried open the security gate and door in the dim lighting. One thing all the attempted burglary reports had in common was that the victims said the same thing, “We never thought that it would happen to us.” All of them also reported that having ignored areas lacking in security or light was a mistake. The victim in Grobler Street had this to say: “Security does not have to cost thousands. You can buy cheap outside halogen lights. You can buy cheap small alarms that go off when windows or doors are tampered with. You can keep a small dog inside your home. I mostly recommend installing a security gate somewhere in your house to give you time to react from a deep sleep if robbers do get inside. That saved me this time. We all know that break-ins increase at this time of year, but still we all believe that they only happen to other people. Be aware that thieves are very active in Louis Trichardt right now. Get more light, and get some cheap extra security, and hopefully that will be true.” 