Mountain bike enthusiasts in Limpopo wrapped up the regional leg of the Spur Schools MTB League on Saturday, 15 September, to mass appeal, and the next time riders take to the track will be at the national inter-schools final at Bekker High School at Magaliesburg this coming weekend. Race director Johan van Dijkhorst said the regional final proved to be a great end to the regional leg of the league, with perfect weather and unparalleled excitement from participating riders and the crowd. He added that a record number of 345 high school riders pedalled off from the starting line at Ellisras High School for the final league race, the Tour de Maroela. “Beautiful hot and sunny weather greeted us on race day, with a great turnout from riders and spectators. The track was awesome and punchy, with some great obstacles along the way,” he said. Van Dijkhorst said a total of 1 324 riders participated in the regional league of this action-packed season and covered a total of 515.1 kilometres, which he adds is further than Johannesburg to Durban. “We had a wonderful season and we’re so excited to make our way to the inter-schools final in Magaliesburg. It’s going to be an exciting event and we can’t wait to see our riders perform well there,” he said. The Limpopo schools making their way to the inter-schools final are Louis Trichardt High School, who finished top of the log, Stanford Lake College, who came in at second place, followed by PHS in third place and Merensky High School in fourth place. The inter-schools final will take place on Friday, 5 October, while the inter-provincial final will be decided on Saturday, 6 October. As winning school, Triegies qualified to enter a 12-rider team for the national finals. The team consists of riders Richard Lambert, Jennavieve Truter, Christelle Coetzer, Eliz-Mari Pretorius, Rohan Cronjé, Calvin Lee, De Wet du Toit, Ditau Mandobe, Danelle Steyn, Vossie van Zyl, Dominique Nel and Michelle Steyn. During last year’s school’s final at Bekker, the Triegies girls’ team caused a stir by finishing fourth overall in the country out of 55 teams.  