“Rise up, Limpopo,” well-known evangelist, farmer and family man Angus Buchan said in a telephonic interview with Zoutpansberger last week and invited residents from Louis Trichardt, Musina and Limpopo to attend the It’s time national prayer event in Pretoria this Saturday. “This is a national appeal to God to intervene. You know, it is not like a gospel concert or even an evangelical outreach. This is a thing that has been organised by South Africans for South Africans and for the nation. It is not as if Billy Graham is coming to speak. It is the ordinary person in the street that is going to get on their knees. God won’t disappoint us,” Buchan said. It’s time’s organisers are preparing for five million people to attend. The flattened It’s Time arena area near Rhino Park Airfield in Pretoria covers 375 hectares and the total area to be used is 2 500 hectares, including the parking and camping area. There will be 29 sound towers with 700 speakers, with the structure for speakers and screens five stories high, so that everyone attending will be able to hear and see well. The event is free of charge and the main prayer event is expected to start around 12:00. Due to the high volume of traffic expected, vehicles can arrive from 01:00. “I believe when we see five million people bowing the knee to Jesus Christ there is going to be an explosion that goes right through this nation and indeed through the continent of Africa. I believe it with all my heart,” Buchan said. “This is history in the making.” The alternative for South Africa is “absolute chaos”. Buchan stressed the importance of coming together as a nation to pray. A professional trumpeter, who plays for the London Philharmonic orchestra, will fly to South Africa at his own cost to attend It’s Time and play Amazing Grace. He will get a return flight the same evening. People from Mamelodi near Pretoria will conduct a prayer march and arrive by foot at the arena. Taxi associations will help convey people who need transport for the 12km distance from the parking area to the arena, at minimal cost. “That is the spirit going around at the moment. People are so excited,” Buchan said. For those who desire to attend but need transport, a bus will be leaving at 04:00 sharp from the Snymansdrift farm, about 18km south of Polokwane. The transport to the It’s Time event and back will cost R300 per person. Payments are to be made into Limpopo for Jesus Trust IT 26/2011, FNB Cheque Account 62306916381, Platinum Park Polokwane, branch code 260226.  Please write as reference your name, surname, and ItsTime and send notification or proof of payment to Adriaan at 082 959 8005. After payment, please send a WhatsApp with your name and surname to Linda at 084 516 0223. A minibus will be departing from Louis Trichardt to the main bus in Polokwane. Linda must also be contacted to find out more about available space on the minibus. 